Add Q4 `Performance Points & Star Rating Updates` news post (#13708)
ppy/osu-wiki: news/2025/2025-08-25-performance-points-star-rating-updates.md

This can be done in the background, without stopping the world.

### ⏳ Reprocess performance values of all scores (3 - 5 days)

We now need to reprocess all remaining 3 billion scores (this means **any scores you can currently see on the website** will get a new PP value, including scores set on osu!(stable) and osu!(lazer)). This is the most time-consuming part of the deploy process.

During this period:

- Scores in the "Best Performance" on user profiles may be **out of order or not be visible at all**.
- All player total PP, global ranks, country ranks, and profile ranking graphs **will be frozen** in time until we're done reprocessing things. If we didn't freeze things, users would question their rank and PP jumping all over the place, as we have no way of ensuring every score PP and user total PP are updated all at once.

### ⏳ Reprocess total PP values for all users (12 hours)

Bring everything back in line with expectations.

### ⏳ Re-enabling of global rank history updates

Rank history graphs will be enabled and updated again. At this point, all users' global leaderboard ranks will be stable going forward.

### ⏳ Reindexing (2 - 3 days)

> This will fix scores occasionally being out of order on profiles under "best performance", and in some rare cases not being displayed at all.

Author: I assume this is running the same as last time (start recalculating star ratings in the background, publish newspost when people start to notice changes) but @peppy would be good to confirm if this needs any changes.

## osu!

### Improved relationship between PP and star rating

A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/31351) proposed by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) moved AR, Hidden and OD bonuses from PP into star rating. This means that star rating values will now be better correlated with their PP values. This also introduces Hidden as a difficulty-affecting mod. PP values are **not** affected by these changes.

Some examples of beatmaps affected by these changes:

- [Iyowa feat. Adachi Rei - Heat abnormal [OGLE-2005-BLG-390Lb]](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/2058976#osu/4303461) with HD: 6.66* --> 8.04*
- [xi - Ascension to Heaven [Death]](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/34348#osu/111680) with HDDTHR: 9.83* --> 10.75*
- [Niko - Made of Fire [Oni]](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/10112#osu/40017) with HDDTHR: 9.51* --> 10.33*

### Slider break estimation changes

> In osu!(stable), slider breaks do not count as misses and instead award a 100 or 50 alongside your combo breaking. As a result, the PP system has estimations in place for osu!(stable) scores to guess how many slider breaks exist in a score. Previously, the system only used combo for these estimations. Many scores have been escaping miss penalty as a result of the PP system estimating sometimes less than half of the score's real slider break count.
> 
> Thanks to [Givy120](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/10560705)'s [set](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33066) of [changes](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33170), most osu!(stable) slider break estimations now happen via calculations using the [ScoreV1](/wiki/Gameplay/Score/ScoreV1/osu!) value of a score. This works by calculating the maximum score achievable, comparing it to the score's ScoreV1 value and estimating how many breaks occurred within that missed score.
> 
> An additional [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/31234) proposed by [KermitNuggies](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/33452559) was made to compliment this which makes an additional assumption that a player misses difficult circles and sliders in equal proportion. This means part of slider break estimations will be made by weighting your miss count against the ratio of difficult sliders in the beatmap.
> 
> Overall, these changes allow for much more accurate slider miss count estimations for osu!(stable) scores.

Reviewer: the included info is good but could be presented better

```suggestion
First, some context: in osu!(stable), slider breaks do not count as misses and instead award a 100 or 50 alongside your combo breaking. As a result, the PP system can't know how many of those 100s or 50s are actually slider breaks and must estimate this value. Previously, the system only used the score's max combo for these estimations, but it has in some cases been underestimating slider break counts by over a half.

The significance here is that slider breaks are penalised much like actual misses, so underestimating their amount has resulted in some osu!(stable) scores receiving more PP than intended.

To rectify this, the slider break estimation has now been improved by taking into account the [ScoreV1](/wiki/Gameplay/Score/ScoreV1/osu!) value of a score and comparing it with the maximum ScoreV1 score achievable for the map. The difference between them, along with the amount of difficult sliders present in the map, is used to deduce the slider break count more accurately.

This is the result of a [set](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33066) of [changes](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33170) by [Givy120](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/10560705) and [additional contributions](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/31234) by [KermitNuggies](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/33452559).
```

- A [refactor](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33218) by [Natelytle](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/17607667) to improve understanding of deviation calculations
- A [refactor](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33265) by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) to aid with difficulty calculation maintenance
- A [refactor](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33423) by [Givy120](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/10560705) to optimise rhythm calculations
- A [refactor](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33271) by [Givy120](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/10560705) to improve readability of the new Hidden bonus

## osu!taiko

### Steeper accuracy scaling & rhythm penalties

A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/34188) by [rloseise](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6793778) was made to replace existing accuracy calculations with a steeper formula. This means differences in accuracy now have a larger effect on PP.

To reward high accuracy on harder beatmaps, the SR bonus in accuracy PP now diminishes as the estimated unstable rate increases:

![](/wiki/shared/news/2025-08-25-performance-points-star-rating-updates/taiko-accuracy-scaling.png)

> Additionally, higher estimated unstable rates will diminish the rhythm difficulty contribution to PP. This addresses scores which sacrifice accuracy in order to ignore hard rhythms and play them as much easier ones. This penalty scales by how much of the beatmap's difficulty is made up by difficult rhythm, meaning beatmaps without much rhythm difficulty are mostly unaffected. In order to balance alongside this change, rhythm as a whole was buffed and rhythmically complex beatmaps will have a higher SR than before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, higher estimated unstable rates will reduce the contribution of rhythm difficulty to PP. This addresses scores which sacrifice accuracy in order to ignore hard rhythms and play them as much easier ones. The penalty applies less to maps without difficult rhythms, leaving them mostly unaffected.

In order to balance the change, rhythm difficulty as a whole has been buffed to a point where rhythmically complex beatmaps will have a higher SR than before.
```

This is how the rhythm penalty looks on [MAX - Checklist (feat. Chromeo) [123 // abc]](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/2155487#taiko/4543374) (a significantly rhythmically complex beatmap):

![](/wiki/shared/news/2025-08-25-performance-points-star-rating-updates/taiko-rhythm-penalty.png)

### Length bonus revamp

A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33582) by [rloseise](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6793778) was made in order to entirely revamp the length bonus in PP.

> Previously, the length bonus was applied based on the number of objects in the map and would reach its maximum bonus at 1500 objects. Length bonus now scales by a weighted object count depending on how consistently difficult the beatmap is, gradually converging towards a maximum bonus rather than ending abruptly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Longer maps award more PP, but this effect was capped at 1,500 objects. [rloseise](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6793778) has [removed this cap and entirely replaced the "length bonus" formula](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33582) as part of this update.

The length bonus is now scaled by how consistently difficult the beatmap is, and it gradually converges towards a maximum rather than ending abruptly:
```

![](/wiki/shared/news/2025-08-25-performance-points-star-rating-updates/taiko-length-bonus.png)

### Miss penalty changes

A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33409) by [rloseise](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6793778) was made in order to make the miss penalty more difficulty-aware.

> The new miss penalty is *also* scaled by a weighted object count depending on how consistently difficult the beatmap is, meaning frequent misses on less consistent beatmaps are punished more than misses on more consistent beatmaps:

Reviewer: again, this "miss penalty" needs context

```suggestion
Each miss used to give a fixed multiplier to the PP value, but with [this change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33409) by [rloseise](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6793778), it's now more difficulty-aware.

In short, like the length bonus mentioned above, the new miss penalty is *also* scaled by object count and how consistently difficult the beatmap is, meaning frequent misses on less consistent beatmaps are punished more than misses on more consistent beatmaps:
```

![](/wiki/shared/news/2025-08-25-performance-points-star-rating-updates/taiko-miss-penalty.png)

### Rhythm object-snapping fix

A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33403) by [ltca](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11475208) and [BabySnakes](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/4669728) was made in order to fix an issue with "unsnapped" objects unfairly buffing rhythm difficulty.

Prior to this fix, objects placed 1-5ms off of their intended timing would be treated as entirely new rhythms. These patterns would be played identically, however the system incorrectly saw these as constant, complex rhythm changes and would inflate star rating as a result. In some extreme cases, this caused inflation upwards of 2*.

This fix works by normalising times between objects within a certain tolerance, meaning that 1ms unsnaps will be normalised to the same time and treated as the same rhythm. For maps not abusing this problem, this change has minimal effects.

### Colour penalty fix

A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33641) by [ltca](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11475208) was made in order to fix a that caused patterns to unfairly avoid colour penalties.

> Colour difficulty contains a penalty for long patterns with no rhythm changes, but this penalty would only apply if the pattern's rhythm was *exactly* the same. This was addressed by looking back at previous notes and calculating an average, so that slightly missnapped notes are still correctly penalised.

Reviewer: aight, now what's a "colour penalty"

```suggestion
The part of the PP system that evaluates colour difficulty has a penalty for long patterns with no rhythm changes. Before this update, there was an issue ([fixed](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33641) by [ltca](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11475208)) that prevented some patterns from receiving this penalty where they should have received it.

The issue was with the "no rhythm changes" part, that it had no tolerance for slightly missnapped notes. This was addressed by looking back at previous notes and calculating an average, so that the slightly missnapped notes are still correctly penalised.
```

### Minor changes

- A [fix](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33635) by [ltca](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11475208) to ensure the mono length bonus cannot cause an increase in SR when removing notes
- A [fix](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/34829) by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) to ensure 0-strain maps cannot crash difficulty calculations
- A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/34089) by [rloseise](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6793778) to reduce the PP bonus for HD on scores set in osu!(lazer) due to its wider aspect ratio making fast reading easier
- A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33415) by [rloseise](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6793778) to remove static nerfs for the EZ mod
- A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33500) by [rloseise](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6793778) to change how difficulty and accuracy PP are summed
- A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/34962) by [rloseise](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6793778) to rebalance final values to meet community expectations 

> - A [set](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33233) of [changes](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/34327) by [ltca](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11475208) and [rloseise](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6793778) to add the consistency factor that is used above

Reviewer: the what that is used where

Author: yeah, this one is a bit more of a technical detail as to how the length bonus and miss penalty actually know what a "consistent" beatmap is :sweat_smile:

tried something in f9758ba916a991115eca88177399e4a2ea2a3415, hopefully this is good

During this period:

- Scores in the "Best Performance" on user profiles may be **out of order or not be visible at all**.
- All player total PP, global ranks, country ranks, and profile ranking graphs **will be frozen** in time until we're done reprocessing things. If we didn't freeze things, users would question their rank and PP jumping all over the place, as we have no way of ensuring every score PP and user total PP are updated all at once.

### ⏳ Reprocess total PP values for all users (12 hours)

Bring everything back in line with expectations.

### ⏳ Re-enabling of global rank history updates

Rank history graphs will be enabled and updated again. At this point, all users' global leaderboard ranks will be stable going forward.

### ⏳ Reindexing (2 - 3 days)

This will fix scores occasionally being out of order on profiles under "best performance", and in some rare cases not being displayed at all.

## osu!

### Improved relationship between performance points and star rating

> A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/31351) proposed by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) moved AR, Hidden and OD bonuses from performance points into star rating. This means that SR values will now be better correlated with their PP values. This also introduces Hidden as a difficulty-affecting mod. PP values are **not** affected by these changes.

Reviewer 2: Buffs is odd in this sentence, given that usually when people talk about buffs it's usually discussing one time balance chances.

> Some examples of beatmaps affected by these changes:

Reviewer: i don't get this one. "a few examples" would be equivalent and also valid

- [Iyowa feat. Adachi Rei - Heat abnormal [OGLE-2005-BLG-390Lb]](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/2058976#osu/4303461) with HD: 6.66* --> 8.04*
- [xi - Ascension to Heaven [Death]](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/34348#osu/111680) with HDDTHR: 9.83* --> 10.75*
- [Niko - Made of Fire [Oni]](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/10112#osu/40017) with HDDTHR: 9.51* --> 10.33*

### Slider break estimation changes

First, some context: in osu!(stable), slider breaks do not count as misses and instead award a 100 or 50 alongside your combo breaking. As a result, the PP system can't know how many of those 100s or 50s are actually slider breaks and must estimate this value. Previously, the system only used the score's max combo for these estimations, but it has in some cases been underestimating slider break counts by over a half.

The significance here is that slider breaks are penalised much like actual misses, so underestimating their amount has resulted in some osu!(stable) scores receiving more PP than intended.

> To rectify this, the slider break estimation has now been improved by taking into account the [ScoreV1](/wiki/Gameplay/Score/ScoreV1/osu!) value of a score and comparing it with the maximum ScoreV1 score achievable for the map. The difference between them, along with the amount of difficult sliders present in the map, is used to deduce the slider break count more accurately.

Reviewer: seems ok

![](/wiki/shared/news/2025-08-25-performance-points-star-rating-updates/precision-bonus.png)

Some examples of beatmaps buffed by this change:

- [Hitomi Sato - Driftveil City [Funky]](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/752224#osu/1583483) with DTHR: 8.25* --> 9.86*
- [Tanaka Hirokazu - C-TYPE [SS-Type]](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/757146#osu/1592916) with DTHR: 9.78* --> 10.74*
- [Disasterpeace - I Am Only a Man [Irre's Extra]](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/165273#osu/407788) with DTHR: 9.33* --> 11.12*
- [KOTOKO - agony [Impossible]](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/1697454#osu/3468026) with NM: 6.14* --> 6.87*

### Decoupled velocity bonus

A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33541) by [StanR](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/7217455) was made to simplify aim calculations by decoupling the velocity change bonus from angle bonuses.

> This means bonus for small, but rapid velocity change buffs are no longer being restricted to only wide-angled patterns.

Author: wow, the original was pretty bad 😅

Some examples of beatmaps buffed by this change:

- [SHK - Identity Part 4 [Insane]](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/39428#osu/125702) with DTHR: 9.17* --> 9.99*
- [Aoki Chihiro - Kodou [Dynamix's Expert]](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/687511#osu/1580794) with DT: 8.3* --> 8.53*
- [Light - Anoneanoneanoneanoneanoneanoneanoneanone Kouji ga Okureteruno [Anone]](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/822716#osu/1724319) with DTHR: 12.1* --> 12.92*

### Removed same rhythm requirement for angle bonuses

A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/31409) by [StanR](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/7217455) was made to remove the requirement for patterns to have the "same" rhythm in order to award angle bonuses.

> This buffs all forms of complex patterns as they were previously barred from bonus rewards due to rhythms being different between notes. This mainly awards buffs to maps known as "tech" or "DT alt".

Reviewer: reads ok

```suggestion
### Removed same-rhythm requirement for angle bonuses

A [change](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/31409) by [StanR](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/7217455) was made to remove the requirement for patterns to have the "same" rhythm in order to award angle bonuses.

This buffs all forms of complex patterns (mainly "tech" or "DT alt") as they were previously barred from bonus rewards due to rhythms being different between notes.
```

![](/wiki/shared/news/2025-08-25-performance-points-star-rating-updates/hidden-bonus-5.png)

![](/wiki/shared/news/2025-08-25-performance-points-star-rating-updates/hidden-bonus-10.png)

### Minor changes

- A [fix](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/32694) by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) to ensure deviation calculations cannot break speed PP
- A [fix](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/34369) by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) to ensure Traceable's visibility bonus was handled correctly after the recent Hidden changes
- A [fix](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/34544) by [tsunyoku](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11315329) to ensure that slider breaks are not awarded in impossible combo scenarios
- A [fix](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/34065) by [Givy120](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/10560705) to ensure OD accounts for osu!(lazer)'s updated hit windows
- A [fix](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/33110) by [Givy120](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/10560705) to ensure slider break estimations cannot produce an impossibly high number of slider breaks

> - A [fix](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/32790) by [Givy120](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/10560705) to ensure rhythm uses the correct time between objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A [fix](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/32790) by [Givy120](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/10560705) to ensure rhythm calculations use the correct time between objects
```

> - A [fix](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/34877) by [StanR](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/7217455) to ensure rhythm difficulty is reduced for doubletappable patterns

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A [fix](https://github.com/ppy/osu/pull/34877) by [StanR](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/7217455) to ensure rhythm difficulty is reduced for double-tappable patterns
```
